France’s economy could see a steep recovery, experts say, but problems remain
CNBC
PUBLISHED SUN, JUL 4 20218, 8:43 AM EDT

France might still be in the throes of the coronavirus pandemic as the delta variant spreads rapidly, but officials and business leaders are looking ahead to a period of recovery and reflecting on the wider outlook for France’s political and economic future.

“The rebound is very steep, it’s even steeper than last year. So we are quite happy with that,” Agnès Bénassy-Quéré, chief economist at the French Treasury, told CNBC Sunday, pointing to the national statistics office raising its growth forecast for France in 2021 to 6%.

“The official forecast is still at 5% for 2021 because we are still cautious about the fall. As you were saying, there is a delta variant, and we have kept some restrictions up to the end of the year. So already in the spring, when this forecast was made, it included some restrictions, light restrictions of the second half of the year. So far, we have not changed this forecast, then we will see what happens when we have to build the 2022 budget,” he said, speaking to CNBC’s Charlotte Reed while attending an economic forum in Aix-en-Provence.

Of course the Covid-19 pandemic has left a lot of destruction in its wake and no less in France, where over 5.8 million infections have been recorded and over 111,000 deaths to date, according to data from Johns Hopkins University.

Like other countries, France introduced emergency measures to support the economy, businesses and employment during the pandemic and there are now some concerns that the tapering of that support could cause job losses and some firms to shut down.

Bénassy-Quéré said the government had been “very cautious about that,” but that the labor market was currently resilient.


$pl1tT3XT%France: Staff Concluding Statement of the 2021 Article IV Mission
International Monetary Fund
Paris, France- November 9, 2021:
Economic outlook

Strong progress on vaccination has helped effectively contain the COVID virus and has supported a fast normalization of activity. After a slow start early in the year, France is now among the EU countries with the highest vaccination rates (88 percent of adults), driven by measures such as requiring a vaccine or test-linked health pass for participation at most public venues, or compulsory vaccination for certain jobs. While a fourth wave of infections linked to the spread of the Delta variant did materialize, widespread inoculation ensured that hospitalizations and fatalities remained low in contrast to previous waves. The link between health restrictions and economic activity is weakening over time, with mobility levels relatively unaffected during the third and fourth waves.

A robust economic recovery is underway, bolstered by public support and by solid private sector led investment. While output contracted by 8.0 percent in 2020—more than the European average—it has since rebounded, with the economy nearly regaining its pre-crisis level by 2021Q3. Investment is recovering more quickly than consumption, and already exceeds its pre-crisis level. Employment is robust and the unemployment rate has remained relatively stable. Notwithstanding some remaining slack in the economy, supply constraints from ongoing global supply chain disruptions, and recruitment difficulties are starting to weigh on production, particularly in manufacturing. Consumer prices are accelerating, mostly driven by one-off factors, notably a rise in energy prices, and wage pressures remain so-far muted with long-term inflation expectations still well anchored.

The economic outlook has improved sharply. IMF staff have revised up the 2021 GDP growth forecast to around 6¾ percent in 2021, driven by the strong consumption and investment rebound in Q2 and Q3. In 2022, growth is expected to moderate to 3.7 percent. This forecast depends upon continued containment of COVID, normalization of the current supply chain difficulties, and a continued accommodative policy environment. Over the medium term, output is projected to grow almost at par with potential but remain somewhat below its pre-crisis trend. Headline inflation is projected to increase to about 2 percent this year but drop to 1.7 percent by next year, as transitory factors gradually dissipate. The unemployment rate is forecast to decrease to 7.8 percent in 2021 on the back of buoyant labor market conditions for job seekers. The current account deficit is expected to narrow and gradually normalize over the medium term as temporary disruptions in the tourism and aeronautics sectors start to dissipate.

Near-term risks to the outlook are tilted to the downside. The possibility of increasingly virulent new strains of the virus, waning vaccine effectiveness, and more persistent supply-chain bottlenecks could slow the recovery and lead to higher inflation. Downside risks from disorderly transformations could also exacerbate the output loss from inefficient labor and capital allocation. On the upside, a faster rundown of accumulated savings or stronger demand recovery in hard-hit sectors could raise growth in the near term and reduce scarring in the medium term.

Fiscal policy for the recovery

Expansive fiscal support in 2020 and 2021 has played a critical role in cushioning the crisis and fueling the recovery. Early in 2021, the emergency program envelope was increased again in the context of the third partial lockdown, bringing the total envelope for crisis and recovery measures for 2020–22 to about 28 percent of 2020 GDP. The authorities have subsequently begun to scale down and focus support as the crisis has ebbed. Investment policies, such as those in France Relance, are well placed to help limit the scarring effects from the crisis, while greening the recovery.

For 2022, a moderately expansionary fiscal stance is warranted but any additional stimulus should be targeted on supply-side measures to boost potential growth. Once one-off crisis measures are stripped out, IMF staff estimate that the draft 2022 budget constitutes moderate fiscal loosening, which is broadly appropriate given the downside risks. However, additional spending should be prioritized around measures to boost investment, alleviate recruitment pressures, and facilitate reallocation of resources to strengthen the recovery prospects and stimulate potential growth. In this respect, staff supports the investment policies contained in the France Relance and NextGen EU programs. The recently announced France 2030 plan could also boost critical innovation and investment; its governance structures (currently under definition) should include a significant independent private sector component to assure that the state’s role remains limited and that investments are subject to market forces. Throughout 2022, fiscal policy should remain flexible and targeted additional relief support should be provided if downside risks materialize.

The recent spike in energy prices, along with supply chain bottlenecks, have pushed inflation higher and prompted a policy response . IMF staff expects this effect to be largely transitory, with price increases predicted to ease in the course of 2022. The authorities have implemented several temporary measures to reduce price volatility and protect households. Given the distributional impact of the recent surge in energy prices, staff supports compensating vulnerable households through targeted and temporary transfers, such as the recently announced revalorisation du chèque énergie. The authorities should, however, avoid broad-based transfers and long-lasting price-control measures, which are less well targeted and more costly. The cut in electricity taxes and the cap on gas prices reduce price signals, and the indemnité inflation program should be more targeted. They should remain strictly temporary. A further expansion of the chèque énergie would be more appropriate in case of further increases in energy prices.

As the recovery continues into 2023 and beyond, France needs to undertake a gradual but comprehensive fiscal consolidation to rebuild buffers and set the debt-to-GDP ratio on a firmly declining path. Under unchanged policies, IMF staff projects a modest decline in the fiscal deficit, but it would remain above 3 percent of GDP and the debt-to-GDP ratio would keep increasing over the forecast horizon. The gap between France’s debt burden and that of its European peers would widen from already high levels. To reverse this trend and build fiscal buffers against future crises, IMF staff recommends a gradual adjustment path aimed at reaching France’s pre-crisis medium-term objective (MTO) of a 0.4 percent of GDP structural deficit before the end of the decade. This target would require a cumulative fiscal effort of about 4¾ percentage points of GDP over seven years, assuming no further major shocks. To secure the recovery, fiscal consolidation could be somewhat backloaded, at an average annual reduction in the primary structural deficit of around 0.6 percent of GDP over 2023-26 and around 0.8 percent of GDP per year in the medium-term until the MTO is met. Staff’s analysis suggests that this path would rebuild ample room for fiscal policy maneuver while leaving space for needed investment to boost workers skills and for the green and digital transitions.

The fiscal adjustment effort should be concentrated on reducing the growth rate of current public expenditure. Given the already high tax burden in France, IMF staff recommend focusing the fiscal adjustment effort on controlling current expenditures, while allowing some room for needed investment (such as that contained in the France Relance and NextGen EU proposals). Pursuing already planned reforms, such as in pensions, unemployment insurance, and the civil service, would significantly contribute toward the needed adjustment. Other potential areas for trimming include cutting tax expenditures (especially those that hinder achieving climate objectives), reducing overlaps between different levels of government, and simplifying and unifying social support schemes, which could improve targeting to those most in need while generating efficiency savings and improving incentives to increase activity. France should review the spending categories in which its expenditure is well above its peers, with scope for reforms to scale back without seriously impeding the delivery of public services. In the future, revenue from higher carbon pricing—critical to the green transition—could also help financing appropriate environmental investments and providing compensation for the most vulnerable.

The commitment to this fiscal adjustment path should be backed by a strong fiscal expenditure rule and enhanced responsibilities of the fiscal oversight body. IMF staff calculations suggest that a limit on expenditure growth of 1.7 percent per year (compared to 2.4 percent under the baseline) would achieve the recommended adjustment path. The fiscal rule should be based on a multiyear commitment for expenditure at the general government level, in line with recommendations by the Cour des Comptes, and should include a mechanism to clearly monitor deviations in previous years and assure compliance with the medium-term objectives. Strengthening the competencies and capacities of the Fiscal Council (HCFP) would also help ensure compliance. Of course, this rule (and the recommended fiscal path) should be adjusted as needed to be consistent with any revisions in the European fiscal framework. IMF staff believe, however, that France should not wait for European action to move ahead with its own fiscal rule.

Protecting financial stability

The banking sector has withstood the crisis well and provided ample credit to the economy. This reflects healthy capital and liquidity positions going into the crisis, and significant policy support during the crisis, including government measures to support households and the corporate sector. Widespread corporate defaults have not materialized, although some delayed, sector-specific solvency risk could still emerge as emergency support measures phase out. In this context, bank asset quality should continue to be monitored and banks should proactively engage with viable, but challenged corporates to design solutions, drawing on available options including the prêt participatif, which may need to be readjusted to be more attractive to firms. Any potential banking sector losses should be reflected by deploying provisions and capital buffers. Closely monitoring conglomerate intragroup transactions and developing concentration thresholds to limit risk from highly indebted firms will aid efforts in strengthening the sector’s resilience further. As the recovery firms, incentives could be adjusted to reduce the extraordinary contingent liabilities of the State in a timely manner.

The macroprudential stance remains broadly appropriate but may require tightening if risks from debt-driven asset valuations increase . IMF staff supports a timely re-activation of the counter-cyclical capital buffer—possibly in 2023— conditional on the recovery unfolding at least as quickly as under staff’s projections. Measures by the supervisory authority, HCSF, have limited and in part reversed a deteriorating trend in mortgage lending standards, but risks from the real estate market require continued vigilance. Fueled by low interest rates and a relatively inelastic housing supply, real estate price growth accelerated in 2020 and household debt to income remains elevated, reflecting the need for higher debt to cover increasing housing prices. If these trends continue, fine tuning existing borrower-based measures or deploying complementary measures may become appropriate to limit excessive risk-taking and smooth housing market dynamics.

Structural reforms to reduce scarring and ensure an equitable and resilient recovery

Continued action to proactively address labor-market frictions and ensure equitable opportunities for the youth will help achieve a speedy and durable recovery. Large scale employment losses were prevented by the extensive deployment of the short-time work scheme, which preserved employment relationships and limited a drop in labor force participation. Job creation rebounded quickly as containment measures were removed, perhaps reflecting dividends from earlier labor market reforms. Labor market conditions are now tightening, however, as reflected in the rise in vacancies, while long-term unemployment remains high. To prevent labor market mismatches from slowing the speed of the recovery, policies should be aimed at alleviating skills shortages, such as combining job-search assistance schemes with training programs. The programs targeted at youth out of work and education ( contrat d’engagement) and at boosting training for activities with skill shortages ( mesures pour le développement des compétences et l’insertion dans l’emploi ) included in the 2022 budget can help in this regard. Further rectifying educational disparities that affect access to employment, through measures strengthening the school-to-work transition, will also ensure that the growth dividends are equitably and sustainably distributed.

Policies to raise competitiveness will enable France to strengthen its external position and increase resilience to external shocks. After a marked deterioration since before the global financial crisis, France has managed to stabilize its export performance in recent years, but further improvement is needed. Additional product market reforms to ease regulation and entry barriers in non-tradable service sectors would help in this regard. Targeted efforts to foster innovation via human capital investment and funding for basic research, including in sectors at the technological frontier, would also enhance competitiveness and increase production capacities. If properly designed and managed, the France 2030 program could also help.

IMF staff welcomes the authorities’ accelerated push for achieving carbon neutrality and reducing the emissions gap. The EU’s “Fit for 55” policies introduced more ambitious emission reduction targets in line with the EU’s objective of achieving carbon neutrality throughout the union by 2050. The objective of climate neutrality is enshrined in French law since the 2019 Climate and Energy Law. To achieve this challenging goal, France should pursue its efforts, implementing additional green policies to reduce emissions and strengthening the existing ones, including adequate carbon pricing with mitigating measures for low-income households. In this vein, leveraging French firms’ strong presence in automobiles, power generation, and aeronautics to establish a technological lead in green energy generation and zero emission transportation would additionally aid the accelerated push. The push for improved worker training and skills matching will be particularly important to facilitate the green transition without generating employment losses.



$pl1tT3XT%France Economic Outlook and Overview
FOCUSECONOMIC
May 3, 2022.
According to a flash estimate, GDP growth flatlined in quarterly terms in Q1 as a record breaking Covid-19 wave led to a contraction in private spending. Moreover, the external sector was likely weighed on by the breakout of war in Ukraine. Turning to this quarter, business conditions improved in April, after moderating on average in the prior quarter. The composite PMI rose to its highest level since January 2018 due to easing Covid-19 curbs, while business confidence improved in the same month amid a strong increase in order books. Moreover, on 24 April, Emmanuel Macron became the first president to win reelection in 20 years after beating Marine Le Pen in the second round of the presidential elections. Macron is expected to continue with his business-friendly labor market reforms and tough economic sanctions on Russia.

France’s economy is the fifth largest in the world and represents around one fifth of the Euro area gross domestic product (GDP). Currently, services are the main contributor to the country’s economy, with over 70% of GDP stemming from this sector. In manufacturing, France is one of the global leaders in the automotive, aerospace and railway sectors as well as in cosmetics and luxury goods. Furthermore, France has a highly educated labor force and the highest number of science graduates per thousand workers in Europe.

In the external sector, France’s closest trading partner is Germany, which accounts for more than 17% of France’s exports and 19% of total imports. France’s primary exports are machinery and transportation equipment, aerospace equipment and plastics, while primary imports include machinery, automobiles and crude oil. Additionally, France is the most visited country in the world, making tourism a prominent sector in the economy.

Compared to its peers, the French economy endured the economic crisis relatively well. Protected, in part, by low reliance on external trade and stable private consumption rates, France’s GDP only contracted in 2009. However, recovery has been rather slow and high unemployment rates, especially among youth, remain a growing concern for policymakers. After the start of the crisis the economy stagnated and the country has had to face several economic challenges. Government tax revenue has dwindled and consumer purchasing power has declined. Policy makers have attempted to modernize the economy; however, this has been a difficult process. The former Sarkozy government became deeply unpopular, partially due to its reform agenda. Nonetheless, with a government budget deficit that is higher than the Euro-area average and low growth forecasts, the current Hollande government faces the challenge of restoring France’s public finances while encouraging economic growth.



$pl1tT3XT%Key economic indicators and trade statistics, which countries are dominant in the market, and other issues that affect trade.
ITA (International Trade Administration)
12-10-2021
In 2020, the government of France re-imposed several months of strict confinement measures to curb the spread of the COVID-19. The government forced many small businesses to shut down entirely or change their business model to offer take-out or delivery options. Most companies switched to working from home through a virtual telework format. All major international trade shows were canceled or postponed. International travel and intra-region travel within France were also severely limited. During this period, U.S. companies interested in exporting goods and services or promoting in-bound investment had to adapt and evolve by conducting events through virtual conferences or webinars.   

In response to the economic impact of the pandemic, the government of France launched a two-year €100 billion ($ billion) recovery plan called the Plan de Relance in September 2020.  Emergency measures rolled out from March 2020 safeguarded household incomes and drove the uptick in consumption in recent months. However, lasting economic impacts on the productive capital and the deterioration of employees’ skillsets could compromise France’s growth potential.  The bulk of the recovery plan aims to support employment in the short term and pave the way for the French economy of 2030, which will be greener, more competitive, and more inclusive.  France’s Plan de Relance aims to bolster competitiveness through investments in critical sectors such as health, electronics, agrifood, and industrial 5G application.  The plan also lays out objectives for France to become Europe’s first major decarbonized economy by achieving carbon neutrality by 2050 through ecological/green initiatives.  France aims to improve productivity through training and workforce development programs to strengthen France’s industrial leadership and resilience.

The French central bank estimated on September 13th that France’s economy will pick up 6.3 percent in 2021 while the French government expects a 6 percent GDP growth.  The rebound should extend into 2022, with growth remaining vigorous at around 4 percent, and economic activity projected to return to its pre-Covid level by the end of 2021.

Historically, the U.S.-French commercial and economic alliance is one of the United States’ oldest and closest. The United States and France established diplomatic relations in 1778. The United States’ first trade agreement, the Treaty of Amity and Commerce between the United States and France, was signed that same year.  Relations between the United States and France have remained active and friendly. Our countries share common values and have similar policies on most political, economic, and security issues.

With a GDP of approximately $2.6 trillion in 2020 (down 8.2% in 2020, +1.5% y-o-y growth in 2019), France is the world’s fifth-largest economy and Europe’s third-largest economy after Germany and the UK.  It has substantial agricultural resources and maintains a strong manufacturing sector, despite a recent decline.  A dynamic services sector now accounts for an increasingly large share of economic activity and is responsible for most job creation in recent years.  France initiated the G-20, is host to the OECD, and is a member of the G-7,  the European Union, and the World Trade Organization, confirming its status as a leading economic player globally.

France has an educated population, first-rate universities, and a talented workforce.  It has a modern business culture, sophisticated financial markets, strong intellectual property protections, and innovative business leaders.  The country is known for its world-class infrastructure, including high-speed passenger rail, maritime ports, extensive roadway networks and public transportation, and efficient intermodal connections.  In 2019, France was the ninth-largest global market for foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows.  In total, there are more than 28,000 foreign-owned companies doing business in France.  It is the home to 29 of the world’s 500 largest companies.  In 2020, the World Economic Forum ranked France 9th in terms of global competitiveness economic transformation readiness.  France was also ranked 4th in the “Countries with the Best Foreign Direct Investment Opportunities” 2020 annual survey of global business executives, financial advisors, affluent families, financial institutions, corporations, private investors, and high-to-ultra high net worth individuals that ranks markets that are likely to attract the most investment in the next three years.

Trade and investment ties between the United States and France are strong. On average, over $1 billion in commercial transactions, including sales of U.S. and French foreign affiliates, takes place every day. U.S. exports to France include industrial chemicals, aircraft and engines, electronic components, telecommunications, computer software, computers and peripherals, analytical and scientific instrumentation, medical instruments and supplies, and broadcasting equipment. The United States is the top foreign destination for French investment. By country of the ultimate beneficial owner (UBO), France entered the top 5 investing countries at the end of 2020 ($315.0 billion), moving up one position from 2019. The United States is the largest foreign investor in France in terms of job creation.  In 2020, the United States was the leading foreign investor in France with a stock of foreign direct investment (FDI) totaling over $91.1 billion.  More than 4,600 U.S. firms operate in France, supporting nearly 480,000 jobs.  A total of 204 investments were recorded from the United States in France in 2020, creating 8,286 jobs, 5 percent more than in 2019.  In 2020, the United States exported $42.9 billion of goods and services to France, down 28.8 percent from 2019.  The United States and France have a bilateral convention on investment and a bilateral tax treaty addressing, among other things, double taxation and tax evasion.



$pl1tT3XT%icsem
14 Nov 2017
Social enterprise is a notion little discussed in France by comparison with other national contexts. The most commonly used concept today is that of social and solidarity economy (SSE). SSE is now recognized as a major force in the French economy, accounting for more than 10% of total employment. An important step towards its institutionalization has been achieved with the adoption of a specific law in July 2014. This law defines the criteria of the social economy as follows: a purpose other than the distribution of profits, democratic governance, reinvestment of profits in the activity and compulsory asset lock. It therefore includes all associations, cooperatives, mutual organizations and foundations. 1 In addition to these traditional legal forms of SSE, the law opens up the field of SSE to commercial companies whose economic activity has a social utility purpose (support to persons in a situation of fragility, fight against exclusion and inequalities, education in citizenship, sustainable development) and whose management meets the following criteria: the financial surpluses must be allocated in priority to the social mission and to compulsory reserves; the company’s shares cannot be negotiated on capital markets; and an equitable wage policy (with a wage scale in which the highest salary does not exceed 10 times the lowest salary) must be implemented. These commercial enterprises can be labelled as “solidarity enterprises of social utility” (entreprise solidaire d’utilité sociale, or ESUS) by public authorities (prefecture).

It is thus not easy to depict the French situation as far as social enterprises are concerned. The guiding hypothesis of this text is that the social enterprise as initially conceptualized within the EMES International Research Network (Defourny 2004) is little used in France because it does not correspond to a stabilized approach and takes different forms, situating it between three poles that characterize the current French situation: the solidarity economy, the social economy and social entrepreneurship, as represented in figure 1 below.

The criteria traditionally defining social economy organizations were the following: objective of serving the members or the community rather than making profit; managerial autonomy; democratic control by the members; primacy of persons and social objective over capital in the distribution of surpluses (Desroche 1976; Vienney 1994). These were included in the Chart of social economy, written by the organizations themselves in 1980 (see below). The recent law is therefore loyal to these criteria.

The solidarity economy, for its part, brings together all the activities contributing to the democratization of the economy through citizen involvement. The characteristic of this perspective is that it considers these activities not only in terms of their legal forms (association, cooperative, mutual benefit, etc.), but also through their dual—economic and political— dimension (Eme and Laville 2006; Dacheux and Laville 2003). 

The aim of social entrepreneurship is to create a profitable or cost- efficient economic activity responding to social and environmental needs in the framework of a private initiative serving the general interest. The emphasis is thus placed on the combination of economic efficiency and a social objective, with the purpose of reinvesting economic surpluses into the social mission. In France, however, this notion is closely related to that of social entrepreneur. A suggested by Mair and Marti (2006), the notion of “social entrepreneur”, by contrast with that of “social enterprise”, focuses on the individual characteristics of the entrepreneur and on his/her behaviour. In the rest of this paper, when mentioning “social entrepreneurship”, we will stress the focus on the individual social entrepreneur and his characteristics.
