The Mexican economy has been growing at an average rate of 2.1 percent during the last 10 years despite the recent complicated international environment. The strength of Mexico in terms of its economy underlies in the responsible economic, financial, and commercial policies, which aims to strengthen the domestic market. For example, Mexico’s economic development strategy includes the strengthening of consumption in effect to social programs and greater financial inclusion, promoting private investment in strategic sectors, increasing public investment, increasing trading relations with other countries for the reconstruction of global value chain.

Mexico is considered as the 15th largest economy in the world, while leading exporter in the Latin America. It has a Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of $1,269 billion, with a nominal GDP of $9,946. As an emerging global player in the economy, Mexico has a Foreign Direct Investment of $29.3 billion placing 19th in the World Export Ranking. Mexico is becoming a fundamentally middle-class country with 50 percent of its population as middle class, and 30 percent being in the upper class. Ideally, the economy of Mexico will continue to prosper for the following years.

Mexico is considered to be one of the most open economies in the world, with limited restriction to trade. Mexico has access to 50 countries through its mutually Free Trade Agreements (FTA). Mexico’s FTA with Pacific alliance comprise 41% ($2,707) of Latin American and Caribbean GDP. On the other hand, Mexico’s FTA with European Union (EU) shared 22.9% ($19,974) of world’s GDP. Meanwhile, USMCA has a GDP of $24,440 which comprises of 28% of world’s GDP. Lastly, the FTA of Mexico with CPTPP shares 12.9% ($11,262) of the overall world’s GDP.

Mexico ranked 2nd largest economy in Latin America, after Brazil with a total of $1,268,870 billion GDP. However, even if it ranked 2nd, it is considered as the leading exporter in the whole Latin America region. One-thirds (1/3) of the exports of whole Latin America, has Mexican origins.

Mexico’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is gradually increasing through time. The table shows the seasonally adjusted trend from the first quarter of 2008 to the fourth quarter of 2020. As of the fourth quarter of 2020, the year to end GDP of Mexico is at $1.2 trillion.

In the period from January-September 2020 the countries with more investments in Mexico were firstly, its partners in USMCA (United States and Canada), followed by a significant number of European countries (Spain, Netherlands, Germany, United Kingdom), and Asian countries (Japan). In 2020 Mexico received foreign direct investment for more than USD 29 billion, most of it invested in the manufacturing industry.





$pl1tT3XT%With a population of almost 130 million, a rich cultural history and diversity, and abundant natural resources, Mexico is among the 15 largest economies in the world and the second largest economy in Latin America. The country has strong macroeconomic institutions, and it is open to trade.   

Over the last three decades Mexico has underperformed in terms of growth, inclusion, and poverty reduction compared to similar countries. Its economic growth averaged just above 2 percent a year between 1980 and 2018, limiting progress in convergence relative to high income economies.

The economy grew 4.8 percent in 2021 after contracting by 8.2 percent in 2020. Supported by increased mobility and U.S. demand, the services and manufacturing sectors posted solid performances during the first half of 2021. However, the recovery lost momentum during the second half of 2021 because of supply chain shortages, a rise in COVID-19 cases, and depressed investment. To enable a better and sustained recovery over the medium term, the country will also need to deal with some of the most pressing pre-crisis challenges to growth and inclusion.




$pl1tT3XT%Mexico is recovering from a pandemic that had deep economic and social impacts. Informal workers, women and youth were particularly hit, exacerbating long-standing social challenges. Mexico’s solid macroeconomic policy framework safeguarded macroeconomic stability. But medium term growth prospects have weakened and growth over the past two decades has been low. Poverty rates and regional inequalities remain high. Informality, ﬁnancial exclusion or corruption have hindered productivity growth. Low female participation rates and weak investment since 2015 have also impacted medium-term growth prospects. Maintaining and strengthening Mexico’s solid macroeconomic policy framework is key for stability.





$pl1tT3XT%Mexico is a typical emerging economy: on the one hand, the country is an important regional and global player that has achieved considerable economic success and that is actively involved in shaping international politics. On the other hand, it is still facing the social and environmental challenges typically associated with a developing country.

The current Human Development Index (HDI) ranks Mexico 76th out of the 189 countries assessed. Thanks to comprehensive social programmes, the country has managed to reduce the number of people living in extreme poverty. According to World Bank data, some two per cent of Mexico's people currently live on less than 1.90 US dollars a day.

However, the country has not yet managed to eliminate the structural causes of poverty. The Mexican government calculates the national poverty rate on the basis of a multidimensional index, according to which more than 40 per cent of the country's people are still living in poverty.

The distribution of wealth is extremely unequal, with huge differences between regions and between population groups.

Violence against women

Although Mexico is a signatory to the main human rights treaties, they are not being implemented consistently. In particular, violence against women has reached alarming proportions. In response to the rising number of women murdered, "femicide" has been made a crime in its own right in several Mexican states.




$pl1tT3XT%Mexico’s economy is especially strong in the service sector. In the 2nd quarter of 2021, this sector represented 64.07% of GDP and employed 61.07% of the labor force, while the industrial sector represented 28.33% of GDP and employed 25.12% of the labor force, and the primary sector represented 3.37% of GDP and employed 13.25% of the labor force. [1] In the period between 2010 and 2018, the Mexican economy grew at an average of 2.8%, however, due to the fall in oil prices in 2019 and the global economic crisis caused by COVID-19 in 2020, the economy has been affected in recent years It is foreseen that  it will grow during  2021. This growth will be strengthened by the economic development strategy of the Mexican Government that includes a consolidation of domestic consumption as a result of the implementation of social programs and financial inclusion, an increase of private investment in infrastructure and strategic sectors, a higher level of public investment, and an increase in exports as a consequence of  the reconfiguration of global value chains.