UAE’s economy advances to achieve sustainable growth
 The national economy will witness an acceleration in the implementation of its development plans

Hazem Hussein/Mohd Aamir, WAM (Emirates News Agency)
May 18, 2022
UAEECONOMY
PHOTO
ABU DHABI: The UAE has entered a new era of development and economic diversification, under the theme, "Growth Sustainability," based on the empowerment phase. The country has created a developed infrastructure and advanced national industries and is continuing the implementation of the UAE Centennial 2071, which prioritises the economy.

In this report, the Emirates News Agency (WAM) will highlight the key features of the upcoming phase, under the leadership of President His Highness Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, as the country is moving forward, proved by its achievements over the past five decades to a new era of development, reinforcing its leading stature as a financial and economic power and a global model to be followed.

The UAE is achieving development based on advanced infrastructure and benefitting from the innovations and technologies of the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) and artificial intelligence (AI). It is increasing the competitiveness of the national economy, attracting talents, investing in energies and future skills, and focusing on a knowledge-based economy through new unprecedented strategies for economic diversification and capacity building in new economic sectors.

Under the leadership of President His Highness Sheikh Mohamed, the UAE is maintaining its leadership as a regional and international destination for investment, trade and tourism and is continuing to lead global competitiveness indexes.

The national economy will see a boom in the digital economy in the upcoming period, being a key driver of competitiveness and the efforts aimed at enabling the community to utilise the tools of 4IR while capitalising on competitive advantages present in vital national sectors, including petrochemicals, derivatives, supply chains and aluminium production, as well as from the partnerships established by the country, such as the comprehensive economic partnership agreement (CEPA) with India.

The national economy will witness an acceleration in the implementation of its development plans and further support for the private sector while adding new economic sectors based on advanced industries and ensuring the readiness of national competencies for newly created sectors to enhance the UAE’s stature as a global investment destination. By relying on all the technologies of the 4IR, it will lead the region towards a future based on AI and a knowledge-based economy.

The UAE has achieved considerable success over the past few years, placing it at advanced ranks globally in economic indexes related to knowledge, innovation, research and development and advanced technology. These achievements include the Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum Solar Park, the Barakah Nuclear Power Plant, and the launch of the Hope Probe to explore Mars.

The strategy, titled, "Operation 300 Billion," aims to develop the country’s industry and raise its contribution to the national economy, encourage comprehensive partnership with many countries to open new markets for national exports, and increase the value of foreign investments to AED550 billion by 2030, and AED1 trillion by 2051. The project is one of the strategic goals for the national economy during the current decade.



$pl1tT3XT%UAE reports slight growth of non-oil GDP
The United Arab Emirates is undergoing economic changes as it aims to reduce its dependency on oil.
[Image: A man watches stock movements on a display at the Dubai Financial Market stock exchange in the Gulf emirate on April 12, 2022.]

A man watches stock movements on a display at the Dubai Financial Market stock exchange in the Gulf emirate on April 12, 2022. - GIUSEPPE CACACE/AFP via Getty Images
[Image: AdamLucente.jpg]

Adam Lucente
@Adam_Lucente
April 20, 2022
The United Arab Emirates announced Tuesday a small increase in the non-oil sector’s contribution to the country’s gross domestic product (GDP). 

The non-oil sector contribution to the GDP amounted to 72.3% in 2021. In 2020, the contribution was 71.3%. The biggest non-oil contributors to the GDP were hotels and restaurants at 21.3%, retail at 14.1%, and health and social services at 13.8%, the official Emirates News Agency reported Tuesday. 

Why it matters: The UAE is seeking to reduce its dependence on oil, so the GDP figures represent a somewhat positive sign. The Gulf state is diversifying in a number of ways. In 2023, the UAE will implement a tax on business profits for the first time ever. They are also cutting business fees in a bid to attract startups. 

The UAE is also seeking to become a regional leader in artificial intelligence (AI). To this end, the Dubai International Financial Center announced last month an AI license program. 

On Monday, the Emirati government released new visa categories aimed at attracting investors, entrepreneurs, freelancers and skilled workers. 

The Gulf state has had some success in bringing in new, non-oil businesses. Two major cryptocurrency platforms recently announced they are moving to Dubai. 

Oil remains a major part of the UAE economy. The sector is responsible for around 30% of the Emirati GDP, according to the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries. This assessment is consistent with the figures reported by the Emirates News Agency. 



$pl1tT3XT%DUBAI, May 9 (Reuters) - The United Arab Emirates will introduce a form of unemployment insurance, the cabinet said on Monday, the latest reform by the Gulf country as it strives to attract talent and investment amid increasing regional economic competition.

Insured workers would receive some money for a limited time period if made unemployed, UAE Prime Minister and Vice-President Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum, who is also the ruler of trade hub Dubai, said on Twitter, citing a cabinet decision.

"The intention is to strengthen labour market competitiveness, provide a social umbrella for workers and establish a stable working environment for all," the statement said.

Register now for FREE unlimited access to Reuters.com
The statement did not specify whether this would apply equally to citizens and non-citizen residents in the UAE.

Permission to reside in Gulf countries like the UAE, where foreigners make up 85% of the population according to the IMF, has traditionally been tied to employment, and loss of job usually means the worker has to leave the country.

Gulf states Qatar, Oman, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia have provided some form of unemployment support to citizens, and Bahrain also has a form of jobless insurance for resident non-citizen workers.

As Saudi Arabia, the largest Gulf state, opens up its economy the UAE has been pushing to retain the initiative over its neighbour, introducing new visa types and social reforms to attract and retain skilled labour and their families.

The UAE switched to a Saturday-Sunday weekend this year to move closer to global markets, and in the past 18 months has overhauled laws and regulations, including decriminalising alcohol consumption and pre-marital cohabitation.

The cabinet also announced new quota targets for the employment of Emirati citizens in the private sector - a long-standing policy known as "Emiratization".

It wants to see Emirati nationals representing 10% of private sector staff in companies with more than 50 employees by 2026, with rates increasing 2% a year until then.

Writing by Lisa Barrington; Editing by Edmund Blair and Mark Heinrich
Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.



$pl1tT3XT%https://www.arabianbusiness.com/opinion/how-the-uae-economy-remains-resilient-amidst-turbulent-times
How the UAE economy remains resilient during turbulent times

The Arab world’s second-largest economy is blazing ahead, thanks to new business and demand that have helped insulate it from a sharp increase in global energy and commodity prices following Russia’s war in Ukraine

The year 2022 started on a solid note with the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index (SPX) chalking in an all-time high in January as investors digested the Fed’s “tapering” and “rate hike” cues and estimated the four-decade-high inflation to top out that could provide reasonable performance on the street for the year. Little did investors know its payback time for solid gains clocked in 2020-21.

Investors’ high hopes crash-landed after the Russia-Ukraine conflict began, which caused commodity price shocks. This resulted in a spiraling effect of high inflation that led the Fed to increase the pace of its interest rate hike and balance sheet reduction, a twin effect that’s negative for markets.

Mortgage rates touched 5.11 percent – breaking the 5 percent mark for the first time in more than a decade, resulting in the mortgage industry in the West to crawl.

To top it off, IMF cuts global growth forecasts on the escalating geopolitical tensions that swamped investor sentiment on the lower end.

Despite the turmoil, the IMF expects the UAE’s GDP to expand by 4.2 percent in 2022, up from 3.5 percent previously.

Here are a few reasons how UAE will dodge the bleak macroeconomic environment and prove its mettle to hold high in market turbulence not witnessed in a prolonged period.

UAE’s efforts to tackle record inflation
The Arab world’s second-largest economy is blazing ahead, thanks to new business and demand that have helped insulate it from a sharp increase in global energy and commodity prices following the Russia’s war in Ukraine.

According to March surveys of purchasing managers, non-oil output gains in the UAE remained intact, providing a first glimpse of the conflict’s spillover effects in the region.

Even as input cost inflation reached a 40-month high, the UAE Purchasing Managers’ Index remained at 54.8, well above the 50-point threshold separating expansion from contraction.

While high energy and commodity prices are likely to keep business input costs elevated in the coming months, most firms absorb these higher costs rather than pass them on to customers, helping keep consumer inflation under control.

Furthermore, the Fed’s rate hikes this year should bring inflation down, keeping imported inflation in check in the UAE.

Skyrocketing oil prices
The Middle East’s treasure – “Black Gold” – has risen to its peak since 2014, driven by escalating geopolitical tensions that worsened an already scarce supply.

This year began with an increase in oil prices due to pandemic concerns’ abetment, surging economic growth on the back of a robust global vaccination campaign rising travel demand.
While higher energy prices added to an already high inflation in the West, this proved to be a boon to the UAE, an oil-exporting country.

The UAE government’s oil receipts have increased from $131 billion (AED 480 billion) in late 2021 to $190.5 billion (AED 700 billion) this year due to the energy market disruption caused by the Ukraine-Russia war.

The UAE is set to benefit as the energy market disruption is expected to continue in the coming quarters.

Minimal effects due to Fed’s Interest rate hikes

“Rate Hikes” have been on investors’ dictionaries for the last one year, and finally, in the March 2022 FOMC meeting, Powell disclosed his intention to hike interest rates by 25 basis points.

Investors looked upon this favourably as the ambiguity relating to rate hikes has been put to ease. With the dirham pegged to the US dollar, the US central bank’s actions directly impact interest rates charged by UAE banks.

The UAE Central Bank last increased its repo rate by 25 basis points. Critics state the US economy may not be able to bear the aggressive Fed since their economy is expected to shrink due to higher energy prices and supply chain disruptions caused by China lockdowns.

However, the strength and resilience that the UAE economy has showcased from its pandemic recovery mean it’s well placed to deal with higher rates.

Moreover, UAE bank’s profitability is set to be on a roll in 2022 since it is typically driven by net interest income, which accounts for 69 percent of the UAE banking sector’s total net revenue.

Rate hikes may be a gruelling aspect for the Western economies, but UAE is well prepared to transform this challenge into an opportunity.

A window of opportunity during geopolitical tensions
The UAE responded to the Ukrainian conflict by emphasising its wish to stay out of the diplomatic saga developed around it.

The politically neutral stance of the UAE is an oasis of stability that has benefited the UAE, being a long-popular destination for ultra-high net worth individuals for tourism.

Meanwhile, the sudden wave of Russians into Dubai has increased demand for real estate, sports cars, and marina mooring space.

In addition, the UAE’s recent visa initiatives, including the “golden visa” program, are likely to attract more affluent individuals to the glitzy emirate, boosting the UAE’s tourism, property market, and banking sector.

The year 2021 has been a year of healing, whereas 2022 will be the year of advancement. Increased tourist traffic, mounting energy prices, lavish retail spending, and soaring real estate investment will benefit the broader UAE economy because of high consumer confidence.

Despite the concerns of a global economic slowdown, UAE is well-positioned to turn a setback into a comeback and end 2022 on a high note.



$pl1tT3XT%UAE likely to hit 4.2% GDP growth in 2022 on higher oil prices and likely output
IMF forecast is in line with UAE Central Bank projections as higher oil prices take effect

Published:  April 19, 2022 17:00 Babu Das Augustine, Business Editor


Further oil output will steer the strong gains made by the UAE economy. Image Credit: Suji Su/Pexels
Dubai: The UAE economy is forecast to grow 4.2 per cent in 2022, according to the latest projections by International Monetary Fund (IMF), which is in line with the UAE Central Bank’s forecasts.

High oil prices and the UAE’s potential to increase output gives the country room for further upward revision of growth outlook. Given the UAE is among the few countries with spare oil capacity, a surge in output is predicted over the next two years as it gradually raises production in response to pressure from consuming countries to ratchet up supplies.

Read more
UAE’s GDP grows at 3.8% for 2021, highest in the region: Sheikh Mohammed
UAE’s GDP forecast to grow by 6.2% in 2022 and 6.7% in 2023
UAE's non-oil contribution to GDP over 72% in 2021

The strong growth outlook for the UAE comes amidst concerns about bleak prospects for most of the developed and emerging economies facing inflationary pressures and rising costs from higher interest rates. Global growth is projected to slow from an estimated 6.1 per cent in 2021 to 3.6 per cent in 2022 and 2023. This is 0.8 and 0.2 percentage points lower for 2022 and 2023 than in the January 2022 World Economic Outlook update.

The IMF’s ‘World Economic Outlook’ report revised the UAE GDP growth in 2021 to 2.3 per cent from the earlier 2.1 per cent forecast. In 2023, it expects the UAE economy to grow by 3.8 per cent and maintain an average growth of 4.2 per cent between 2022-27.

GCC outlook
The IMF said the growth outlook of GCC countries have significantly benefitted from higher oil and gas prices. The 2022 forecast for Saudi Arabia is revised up 2.8 percentage points, reflecting higher oil production in line with the OPEC+ agreement, reinforced by stronger than anticipated growth in the non-oil sector.

While Kuwait’s 2022 growth outlook of 8.8 per cent gets a significant boost from high oil prices, Oman and Bahrain are projected to grow by 5.6 per cent and 3.3 per cent. Overall, GDP in the Middle East and Central Asia is expected to grow by 4.6 per cent in 2022.

