Japan's economy contracts annualised 1.0% in Q1
Economy
Wednesday, 18 May 2022

The gross domestic product (GDP) figure translated into a quarterly drop of 0.2%, compared with a median market forecast of a 0.4% contraction, the Cabinet Office data showed.

TOKYO: Japan's economy fell for the first time in two quarters in the first three months of the year as COVID-19 curbs hit the service sector and the Ukraine war and surging commodity prices created new headaches for consumers and businesses.

The decline presents a challenge to Prime Minister Fumio Kishida's drive to achieve growth and wealth distribution under his "new capitalism" agenda, stoking fears of stagflation - a mix of tepid growth and rising inflation.

The world's No. 3 economy shrank at an annualised rate of 1.0% in January-March from the previous quarter, gross domestic product (GDP) figures showed, versus a 1.8% contraction seen by economists. It translated into a quarterly drop of 0.2%, the Cabinet Office data showed, versus market forecasts for a 0.4% drop.

Private consumption, which makes up more than half of the economy, slightly fell, versus a 0.5% fall expected by economists, the data showed.

The weak reading may pressure Kishida to spend even more with upper house elections pencilled in for July 10, following the 2.7 trillion yen ($20.86 billion) in extra budget spending compiled on Tuesday.

Many analysts expect Japan's economy to rebound in coming quarters, but the war in Ukraine and a slowdown in the Chinese economy dim the recovery prospects.

Despite easing coronavirus curbs, doubts remain about the V-shaped recovery, while surging energy and food prices boosted by the weak yen could cap domestic demand.

Japan's export-reliant economy got little help from external demand, with net exports knocking 0.4 percentage point off GDP growth, as the weak yen and surging global commodity prices inflated imports.

That compared with a negative contribution of 0.3 percentage point seen by economists.

Capital spending rose 0.5% versus an expected 0.7% increase, following a 0.4% increase in the previous quarter.





$pl1tT3XT%Japan’s Economy Shrank 1 Percent as Consumers Fled Covid
The world’s third-largest economy lost momentum in the first three months of the year after the Omicron variant suppressed demand at home.

[Image: The Akihabara district in Tokyo. Japan’s economy shrunk in the first three months of the year, largely because of rising Covid case numbers, the war in Ukraine and supply chain problems.]

Credit...Noriko Hayashi for The New York Times
By Ben Dooley and Hisako Ueno

May 17, 2022
TOKYO — Last December, after two years of stop-and-go growth, Japan’s economic engine seemed like it might finally be revving up. Covid cases were practically nonexistent. Consumers were back on the town, shopping, eating out, traveling. The year 2021 ended on a high note, with the country’s economy expanding on an annual basis for the first time in three years.

But the Omicron variant of the coronavirus, geopolitical turmoil and supply chain snarls have once again set back Japan’s fragile economic recovery. In the first three months of the year, the country’s economy, the world’s third largest after the United States and China, shrank at an annualized rate of 1 percent, government data showed on Wednesday.

A combination of factors contributed to the decline in growth. In January, Japan had put into place new emergency measures as coronavirus case numbers, driven up by Omicron, moved toward the highest levels of the pandemic. In February, Russia invaded Ukraine, spiking energy prices. And that was before China, Japan’s largest export market and a key supplier of parts and labor to its manufacturers, imposed new lockdowns in Shanghai, throwing supply chains into chaos.

The contraction has not been as “extreme” as previous economic setbacks thanks to high levels of vaccine uptake and less wide-ranging emergency measures than during previous waves of the coronavirus, according to Shinichiro Kobayashi, principal economist at the Mitsubishi UFJ Research Institute.

But Japan’s economic recovery from the enormous damage done by the pandemic has also not been as fast as the United States, China or the European Union, he said.

Growth is likely to bounce back strongly in the second quarter, analysts said, a pattern that has defined Japan’s economy during the pandemic: Demand has waxed as Covid cases have waned, and vice versa.

Still, growth in the coming months will face some tough challenges. The pandemic and the war in Ukraine have fueled big increases in the costs of food and energy in Japan. And moves by the U.S. Federal Reserve to tackle high inflation have caused the value of the Japanese currency, the yen, to plummet. That has driven up costs in the resource-poor country, which is highly dependent on imports for food, fuel and raw materials.

Inflation in the country, while still modest, is rising at its fastest pace in years, with consumer prices in Tokyo increasing by 2.5 percent in April. And over the last year, prices for producers have shot up 10 percent, the highest levels since 1980.

China’s draconian efforts to keep Covid under control are likely to create additional disruptions for Japanese companies that manufacture, source parts and export their goods there.

How the Supply Chain Crisis Unfolded
Card 1 of 9
The pandemic sparked the problem. The highly intricate and interconnected global supply chain is in upheaval. Much of the crisis can be traced to the outbreak of Covid-19, which triggered an economic slowdown, mass layoffs and a halt to production. Here’s what happened next:

Consumer spending “will recover from the downward pressure, but because there are these negative factors, the question is how broad will that recovery be?” said Yoshiki Shinke, a senior economist at Dai-ichi Life Research Institute.

Japan’s prime minister, Fumio Kishida, has tried to offset the effects of price increases with large government subsidies for fuel and cash handouts for families with children. But Japanese consumers, wary of the pandemic’s economic effects, have largely been putting rounds of stimulus money into savings.

Japan’s growth is facing diverse challenges, but ultimately its recovery will depend on Covid, analysts said, a common refrain over the last two years.

While Japan has high vaccination rates and has performed better than most other wealthy countries at keeping the pandemic in check, the virus’s protean nature has made it difficult to predict its path. And that has made experts hesitant to commit to any forecasts about its future impact on global economies.

“The big risk is that corona starts to spread again,” said Naoyuki Shiraishi, an economist at the Japan Research Institute. “If a new variant appears, there will be new restrictions on activity, and that will suppress consumption.”





$pl1tT3XT%Japan Finally Gets Inflation—but the Wrong Kind After decades of fighting deflation, global price rises are causing political worries.
By William Sposato, a Tokyo-based journalist.

Bank of Japan Governor Haruhiko Kuroda speaks during a press conference in Tokyo on Jan. 23, 2019. Jui Press/AFP via Getty Images
April 25, 2022, 3:57 PM
The head of Japan’s central bank is a very patient individual. When Haruhiko Kuroda became governor of the Bank of Japan (BOJ) nine years ago, he pledged that he would rid the world’s third-largest economy of the deflationary pressures that had helped keep growth slow ever since 1990. His goal was to pump in enough money to create a 2 percent inflation rate that would raise wages and spending power.

With commodity price inflation raising alarms globally, he finally looks set to achieve his goal. While the latest data is highly volatile, economists predict that Japan will finally start to see a 2 percent inflation rate—and possibly more—in upcoming months.

So far the figures remain tame by global standards. While the U.S. Consumer Price Index rose by 8.5 percent in March compared to a year earlier, the highest rate of increase since 1981, Japan’s index was up just 1.2 percent. But that includes a 52.7 percent fall in mobile phone charges after a government crackdown on the three-company cartel that virtually controls the sector.

The head of Japan’s central bank is a very patient individual. When Haruhiko Kuroda became governor of the Bank of Japan (BOJ) nine years ago, he pledged that he would rid the world’s third-largest economy of the deflationary pressures that had helped keep growth slow ever since 1990. His goal was to pump in enough money to create a 2 percent inflation rate that would raise wages and spending power.

With commodity price inflation raising alarms globally, he finally looks set to achieve his goal. While the latest data is highly volatile, economists predict that Japan will finally start to see a 2 percent inflation rate—and possibly more—in upcoming months.

So far the figures remain tame by global standards. While the U.S. Consumer Price Index rose by 8.5 percent in March compared to a year earlier, the highest rate of increase since 1981, Japan’s index was up just 1.2 percent. But that includes a 52.7 percent fall in mobile phone charges after a government crackdown on the three-company cartel that virtually controls the sector.

Other figures were eye-popping by Japan standards. Energy costs jumped 20.8 percent, the steepest rise since 1981, while cooking oil increased 34.7 percent. Another measure of inflation at the wholesale level, the Corporate Goods Price Index jumped 9.5 percent year-on-year in March, due in part to the dire situation in Ukraine.

Overall, economists reckon that after smoothing out the various one-time factors, underlying inflation is now around the target of 2 percent. Yet no one appears to be celebrating. Facing elections in June, the government is scrambling to formulate subsidy packages for those most affected, while the Japanese yen is falling sharply in value. Kuroda, however, appears unconcerned, calling the higher costs a short-term issue that will not deter him from his goal.

For Japan, the costs of more than two decades of deflation are clear. The country remains prosperous, safe, and comfortable, but what many Japanese have not noticed is that the rest of the world has been getting richer in absolute terms, while their country has largely stayed in place. Average annual wages have risen a mere 3 percent over the past 30 years, according to OECD data, compared to a 47 percent gain in the United States. Prices have followed a similar trajectory. Tokyo was for many years ranked as the most expensive city in the world, but Japan’s capital today is not even among the top 10 in most global rankings, with cost cutting, a gradual lowering of tariffs, and greater import substitution helping to bring prices down.

To break out of this, the central bank has for the past nine years flooded the markets with cash, an unprecedented program that made it the buyer of virtually all new government debt. And with government tax revenues covering just 60 percent of spending in an average year, there is a lot of debt to be bought.

This creates two big problems. The Japanese government is the most indebted country in the world, with a total debt equal to around 190 percent of annual economic output. This backdoor financing of government largesse has meanwhile quadrupled the balance sheet of the BOJ to the extent that its own holdings rose to 92 percent of annual GDP in 2020, according to World Bank data, compared with 22 percent in the United States and 18 percent in Germany.

With all this, Japan today seems to have the wrong kind of inflation. The idea behind Kuroda’s target was to create a so-called demand-driven virtuous cycle in which higher-paid workers go out and spend more, pushing up demand, leading to new investment and then higher wages.

Instead, the higher costs from overseas will push up prices and prompt consumers to buy fewer goods, not more. The problem is especially severe in resource-starved Japan, where virtually all raw materials and commodities are imported. That includes more than 60 percent of all the food consumed and around 95 percent of its energy, mainly through oil imports. With generally docile global commodity markets over the past decade, that has not been a huge issue until now, but both wheat and natural gas are in the crosshairs over Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, and the problems are expected to worsen.

None of this is lost on a government looking to secure a stronger mandate in June elections for the upper house of Japan’s parliament. While the ruling Liberal Democratic Party has no risk of losing control, the level of support in the second chamber is often seen as a gauge of voter sentiment about how things are going. To help cushion the blow of higher prices, the government is reportedly putting together a broad $48 billion package of subsidies to help consumers and small businesses. The assistance ranges from additional gasoline subsidies to low-interest loans and cash assistance, according to Nikkei.

At the same time, Japanese Prime Minister Fumio Kishida is using the price spike to help push his “new form of capitalism” designed to spread the wealth from the big companies and affluent retirees that have fared well under the last decade of Abenomics under former Prime Minister Shinzo Abe.

“To cope with rising prices, we will deploy every possible policy measure to protect people’s livelihoods by enabling companies to pass on costs and creating an environment for them to raise wages for workers,” Kishida told a parliamentary session in March.

Skeptics such as Credit Suisse economist and former BOJ official Hiromichi Shirakawa say that asking companies to raise wages even as other costs are going up is a pretty tall order. Japanese consumers have traditionally cut back on their purchasing whenever prices rise. This has made retailers leery of trying to hike prices in the past, leading to the concept of “shrinkflation,” where smaller quantities hide higher unit costs.

Worsening the outlook has been a sudden fall in the value of the Japanese yen, which will make imported goods even more expensive. The yen is nearing 130 to the U.S. dollar, a fall of 10 percent since the start of the year. This will only deepen the economic divide Kishida is trying to narrow. Big companies with heavy overseas interests will reap sharply higher profits as they return their money home, while the average worker will end up paying more at the checkout line.

“As people’s attention turns to higher imported inflation and a weaker yen, it will be necessary to reevaluate and weigh the merits and demerits of not only short-term economic stimulus but also the long-term adverse effects of locking in ultra-loose monetary policy,” said Ryutaro Kono, chief Japan economist at BNP Paribas and a respected BOJ watcher.

For the longer term, the BOJ’s biggest threat is an inflationary cycle that gets out of control. “If the public were to become convinced that the BOJ’s policy stance is exacerbating the yen’s slide and pushing prices higher, the bank could become the villain driving the increasing burden on households,” Deutsche Bank Tokyo chief economist Kentaro Koyama said in a recent report. But raising interest rates, the traditional way to combat rising prices, would not just put the brakes on an already weak economy—it would also cause massive losses on the BOJ’s holdings of government debt.

But Kuroda is not deterred, and the central bank has kept up its bond-buying program in recent weeks despite the worries over debt levels and the falling yen. His goal, he has always insisted, is to break Japan from the “deflation mindset.” With price rises like these, he may well be on the way to success.

The question is whether these fresh worries, combined with Japan’s aging society, shrinking workforce, and slow growth, will create a long-term and potentially irreversible downturn. While the outlook is problematic, Japan has defied the skeptics many times in the past. “Japan is the hardest economy in the world to understand,” Citigroup’s then-chief economist Willem Buiter said at a 2010 event. “If this were physics, then gravity wouldn’t work in Japan.”

William Sposato is a Tokyo-based journalist who has been a contributor to Foreign Policy since 2015. He has been following Japan’s politics and economics for more than 20 years, working at Reuters and the Wall Street Journal. He is also the co-author of a 2021 book on the Carlos Ghosn affair and its impact on Japan.





$pl1tT3XT%Japan’s economy contracts slightly in first quarter Published: May 17, 2022 at 8:58 p.m. ET
By
Megumi Fujikawa
Shoppers browse at a secondhand book and record market in the Shimbashi District of Tokyo on March 23, as the government lifted COVID emergency measures in Tokyo and other regions. Bloomberg News
TOKYO — Japan’s economy contracted in the first three months of the year, when restrictions related to a resurgence of COVID-19 infections held back consumer spending.

The world’s third-largest economy after the U.S. and China contracted 0.2% from the previous quarter, compared with a 0.4% contraction expected by economists surveyed by data provider Quick.

The economy shrank 1% on an annualized basis, showing what would happen if the first quarter’s pace continued for a full year.

Japan has struggled to achieve continuous growth since the Covid-19 pandemic began. In contrast to the U.S., China, and major European economies, the Japanese economy has yet to recover its prepandemic level.

In the January-March quarter, exports rose 1.1% from the previous quarter. Economists said the pace of the export recovery remained slow due to continued supply shortages. Imports increased 3.4% because of demand for COVID-19 vaccines.





$pl1tT3XT%Tokyo Report | Economy | East Asia Japan’s Weak Yen Hampers Its Post-COVID Recovery
The Japanese yen has tumbled to its lowest level, pinching household purses and clouding Japan’s economic outlook.

By Thisanka Siripala for The Diplomat
May 12, 2022

Since the mid-1990s Japan has struggled with mild but chronic deflation while other major economies struggled to address inflation and rising living costs. But now the return of global inflation has begun to push up food prices at supermarkets across Japan.

Prices for typically low-cost items such as bread, milk, jam, ketchup, noodles, sausages, and beer have risen between 2 to 12 percent. This has come as a shock to Japanese consumers, who have lived without inflation for almost 30 years.

Supply side disruptions stemming from the global pandemic and the war in Ukraine coupled with the weak Japanese yen are driving up prices. Last month the Japanese yen slid to its lowest level in 20 years, going above 130 against the U.S. dollar.

A weak yen is typically seen as a blessing for export-orientated businesses as foreign currency can be exchanged for more yen. In turn, it allows companies to lower the prices of goods and increase exports.

Diplomat BriefWeekly NewsletterN
Get briefed on the story of the week, and developing stories to watch across the Asia-Pacific.

But in Japan’s case the benefit of a weak yen is looking more and more questionable amid current inflationary pressures. A survey of 2,000 small to midsize companies found that only 1.2 percent believe the weak yen is favorable. More than half responded that the disadvantages are significant. Some familiar household snack brands are bracing for a drop in sales and rather than raise prices they have opted to reduce the weight of a package of potato chips by three to five grams.

Last week, Japan’s Minister of Finance Suzuki Shunichi described the current situation as a “bad weak yen.” The U.S. Federal Reserve has raised its benchmark interest rates by 0.5 percent in an effort to combat inflation. The Bank of Japan (BOJ), on the other hand, called Japan’s depreciating yen a “plus” for the country and has defended its near zero interest rates. This is in part due to inflation remaining under the 2 percent target set by the BOJ in January 2013.

Some economists are urging the BOJ to raise interest rates. While BOJ chief Kuroda Haruhiko acknowledged the weak yen’s role in increasing business uncertainty and derailing business plans, the BOJ isn’t likely to tweak its monetary policy until the end of year or perhaps after Kuroda’s retirement in April 2023.

The rising cost of raw materials is an added burden on household finances. As a resource-poor island Japan imports 60 percent of its food annually. What’s more, a government survey last year found that food accounted for the highest portion of household expenses at 28 percent. If the food prices continue to rise on the back of stalling wage increases, experts say low income earners will be the first to cut back on household consumption, leading to a significant drop in food sales in the second half of the year.

The government has begun to take action ahead of the upper house elections this summer. Prime Minister Kishida Fumio announced a 6.2 trillion yen ($48 billion) spending package made up of subsidies to cushion fuel price hikes as well as cash handouts for low income households with children.

After the bubble burst in the 1990s, Japan’s economy suffered from a recession caused by a strong yen. Similarly, Japan’s economy slipped into recession following the 2011 triple disaster – a earthquake, tsunami, and resulting nuclear crisis. That prompted former Prime Minster Abe Shinzo (who took office in late 2012) to introduce large-scale monetary easing policies, coined Abenomics, to bring down the yen.

Kishida, who took office seven months ago, promised an upgraded version of capitalism with a “virtuous cycle of growth” as its centerpiece. His vision involves giving companies incentives to boost wages to tackle wealth disparity with the goal of expanding the middle class. Wage growth would lead to increased private consumption that would address the slow pace of inflation plaguing the Japanese economy.

With Japan’s COVID-19 restrictions on travel and dining out lifted in late March, there were hopes for the resumption of household spending. But instead the rising price of energy and food is prompting consumers to look for ways to save money.

Despite the headwinds, it’s believed Kishida will not deviate from the signature monetary policy of political heavyweight Abe, who remains an influential member of the ruling party, until after the upper house election.
