South Korea’s economy slows in Q1 on COVID curbs, inflation
Economic growth nearly halves in first quarter to 0.7 percent amid lower spending due to COVID curbs and inflation.

South Korea’s economic growth nearly halved in the first quarter from the previous three months as consumers and companies cut spending amid coronavirus curbs and surging inflation.

Gross domestic product grew a seasonally-adjusted 0.7 percent in the first quarter from the last quarter of 2021, the Bank of Korea (BOK) said on Tuesday,  down from 1.2 percent in October-December, but slightly ahead of market expectations.

Private consumption shrank 0.5 percent, the worst in five quarters, as the government forced bars, restaurants and other businesses to close early to combat a surge in Omicron variant cases.

Capital investment fell 4 percent, the fastest decline in three years, while construction investment lost 2.4 percent.

From a year earlier, the economy grew 3.1 percent, compared with economists’ forecast of 2.8 percent growth.

“From the current quarter, the growth engine is expected to shift from exports to domestic consumption,” ING economists said in a note. “We are already seeing early signs of a recovery in private consumption as the government lifts most restrictions while the trade balance is going to record a deficit for a couple of months in the near future.”

The BOK is expected to revise down this year’s growth forecast from the current 3 percent estimate in its next review in May, as the country faces headwinds from the Ukraine war, US monetary policy tightening and COVID-19 lockdowns in China.

New BOK Governor Rhee Chang-yong said last week that economic growth is expected to weaken further from earlier projections, highlighting that monetary policy will aim to balance growth and inflation.

The BOK this month raised its benchmark rate to 1.50 percent, the highest since August 2019, in a surprise move as it ramped up the fight against inflation.

The International Monetary Fund recently lowered its 2022 growth projection for the country to 2.5 percent from 3 percent while upgrading its inflation projections to 4 percent from 3.1 percent.

Moody’s has forecast growth of 2.7 percent this year, while ING sees a 2.8 percent expansion.



$pl1tT3XT%South Korea’s consumer prices rise at fastest pace since 2008
Asia’s fourth-largest economy saw its consumer price index rise 4.8 percent last month from a year earlier.
South Korea’s consumer prices rose at their fastest pace in nearly 14 years in April on the back of surging food and energy prices, in the latest sign of high inflation taking off in Asia.

Asia’s fourth-largest economy saw its consumer price index (CPI) rise 4.8 percent last month from a year earlier, up from a 4.1 percent increase in March, Statistics Korea data showed on Tuesday.

The rise, which exceeded market expectations, marks the quickest price growth since October 2008, during the global financial crisis.

The index rose 0.7 percent on a monthly basis, after rising 0.7 percent in March. Core inflation, which excludes volatile energy and food prices, rose to 3.1 percent on a year-on-year basis in April, up from 2.9 percent in March and the highest since May 2009.

The surge in prices is likely to increase pressure on the Bank of Korea, whose new governor Changyong Rhee has expressed concerns about mounting inflation risks, to increase interest rates at its next policy meeting on May 26.

After avoiding the soaring inflation seen in the United States and Europe, Asian economies have become increasingly concerned about rising prices amid inflationary pressures including the war in Ukraine and pandemic-related supply chain disruptions.

The Bank of Korea, which is seen as one of the region’s more hawkish central banks, last month announced a surprise 0.25 percent interest rate increase, taking the benchmark rate to 1.50 percent.

The move marked the fourth increase of the central bank’s base rate since it began tightening policy in August last year as one of the first central banks in high-income countries to raise the alarm about inflation.

Singapore and New Zealand also raised interest rates last month amid growing inflation concerns, while Australia is tipped to announce the first of a series of rate hikes on Tuesday.



$pl1tT3XT%South Korea central bank chief says big-step rate hikes a possibility
By Choonsik Yoo
and Seunggyu Lim

SEOUL, May 16 (Reuters) - The South Korean central bank chief's comment that he could consider big-step interest rate raises in coming months shook the local bond market on Monday, as Asia's fourth-largest economy also braced for fast slowing in growth.

Yields on government bonds rose as traders rushed to cut their bets on a slower pace of policy tightening ahead, while stock prices reversed early gains to fall modestly on weakening economic growth prospects.

Bank of Korea Governor Rhee Chang-yong, who took office last week and is due to chair his first policy meeting on May 26, said he could consider bigger interest rate increases, depending on data that will become available around July and August.
"(I may be able to say) after watching the May policy meeting and more data by around July and August," Rhee said when asked by reporters whether the bank was considering a 50-basis-point interest rate rise at its May 26 meeting.

The Bank of Korea usually changes its benchmark rate in 25-basis point increments, but the U.S. Federal Reserve's big-step approach means South Korea's interest rate premium over the United States will disappear and could soon become a discount.

Another senior Bank of Korea official later played down Rhee's remark, saying it merely emphasised the principles of making policy decisions.

Still, analysts said Rhee's comment made it clear that inflation still took the priority in the central bank's policy.

"We are in a situation when hawkish comments are needed to contain inflation and in turn help stabilise the bond market," said Moon Hong-cheol, economist at DB Financial Investment, adding Rhee's comment may have been a well-calculated one.

The yield on the country's benchmark 10-year treasury bonds, which had fallen nearly 30 basis points over the past week, shot up as much as 12.4 basis points to 3.340% in early trade. It later cut gains to trade 3.0 basis points higher.

Meanwhile, the country's most influential government research agency said in a report that policymakers needed to focus more on the domestic situation and may not have to raise local interest rates as much and fast as the United States does.

Despite inflation hovering around 13-year highs, South Korea's economy also faces a growing risk to growth as cooling in China's economy becomes increasingly clear. This is in addition to the effect of prolonged military conflict between Russia and Ukraine.

The Seoul stock market's KOSPI (.KS11) gave up early gains of nearly 1% to trade 0.3% lower in early afternoon after China released data showing its economic activity had cooled sharply in April because of COVID-19 lockdowns.

President Yoon Suk-yeol requested in a speech at the parliament on Monday an early approval of his government's 54.9 trillion won ($42.81 billion) supplementary budget to help small businesses and self-employed people while cutting government debt. read more

Earlier on Monday, Rhee and Finance Minister Choo Kyung-ho agreed at their first one-on-one meeting since taking office this month to boost policy coordination in fighting inflation and financial market instability. read more

($1 = 1,282.5200 won)



$pl1tT3XT%Korea’s Wealth Creation: Seoul Tries To Balance Social Concerns With Economic Issues

South Korea recovered from a pandemic-driven decline to end last year on solid ground. The world’s tenth-largest economy (and the fourth-largest in Asia) posted GDP growth of 4%, its strongest performance in over a decade, thanks to a record surge in exports. That momentum, however, is expected to diminish in 2022 as global headwinds build.

Goldman Sachs Research recently cut its full-year economic growth forecast to 2.8% on weaker global demand for South Korea’s chips, cars and petrochemicals and other key exports. The Russia-Ukraine conflict and surging oil and energy prices could also have a significant economic impact.

The country’s major firms say rising raw-materials costs are the biggest risk to investment this year, underscoring the potential for inflation to weigh on GDP growth. Headline CPI is expected to stay above the Bank of Korea’s 2% medium-term target—a key risk to macroeconomic stability. The central bank has already raised its benchmark rate three times since August to tackle higher prices.

South Korea’s ratio of household debt to GDP is roughly 106%, with the average family in debt 18 times their annual wages. This has put the country at risk of a housing market crisis that could further impact the value of the won—one of Asia’s worst performers so far this year against the U.S. dollar—and the government’s ability to service its own debts. The rapid spread of the omicron variant, which saw Covid-19 infections rise to an all-time high in March, also poses a threat to the economy’s trajectory.

The government faces some tough decisions as it balances social concerns with economic issues. Incoming president Yoon Suk-yeol sees innovation as the only way forward for Korea Inc., and is expected to focus on pro-business deregulation while reining in government spending to spur growth.



$pl1tT3XT%‘Won’t take it any more’: South Korea’s Starbucks baristas rebel

Seoul, South Korea – On weekday afternoons, the Starbucks in southern Seoul’s Yangjae neighbourhood swells with groups of office workers seeking after-lunch refreshments.

A line forms from the counter to the shop’s swinging glass doors as white-collar workers line up to order hot and cold drinks. Among the seasonal specials are the Lavender Beige Oat Latte topped with cornflower leaves and New Year Citrus Tea garnished with lemongrass and a slice of orange.

“We come here with colleagues after lunch because we know that everyone will be able to find something they like,” Yoon Min-ju, who works at a nearby interior design firm, told Al Jazeera.

“At smaller coffee shops, they usually only have basic coffee and tea. At Starbucks, even people who don’t like coffee or are dieting can order comfortably,” she said.

Starbucks is so popular in South Korea that it can appear like there is an outlet on nearly every block. The country is Starbucks’ fourth largest market, with 1,611 stores and almost 20,000 workers, which the company refers to as “partners”.

But despite the popularity of the brand – built on its sprawling menu, association with the American middle class and branded merchandise – the coffee giant is now facing a challenge to its image in South Korea in the form of scrutiny over working conditions at its stores. The way workers are responding could presage an evolution in labour activism in a country with a history of spirited protest.

In October, when the company held an event offering reusable cups with the purchase of a drink, baristas’ fatigue and frustrations boiled over.

On Blind, an app where employees can anonymously vent about workplace conditions, workers complained of low wages and poor conditions. Some recounted horror stories of having as many as 650 drinks on order at a time, while scrambling to pour, mix and serve an endless stream of customers while making no mistakes, smiling and maintaining friendly customer service.

In December, Ryu Ho-jeong, a left-wing politician, released the results of a survey that found 613 Starbucks workers sought mental health treatment due to job stress in 2020, a more than five-fold increase compared with 2015. The survey also found that workplace accidents had tripled over the previous year.

To draw attention to their plight, workers hired a flatbed truck with a massive light-screen to drive from downtown Seoul to the busy Gangnam area in the city’s south, broadcasting their grievances to the hordes of customers that gather at Starbucks locations across the city after lunch. The screen carried text that addressed the company with messages including “‘Partners’ are your biggest asset. Don’t forget that” and “We won’t take it any more”.

The protest made national headlines, and succeeded in getting concessions from Starbucks Korea, which pledged to hire 1,600 more workers to ease conditions in their stores. The company, which entered South Korea in 1999 at a time when brewed coffee was a novelty, also promised to introduce wage increases based on seniority and performance.

While the Starbucks workers were waging their battle, the stalwarts of labour organising in South Korea took notice of how a group of young service industry workers were able to win both attention and material gains.

The Korean Confederation of Trade Unions, a major umbrella labour group that has more than one million members in industries across the country, welcomed the Starbucks workers’ actions and encouraged them to work towards establishing a union.

“Through the formation of a labour union, the workers can address their grievances,” the KCTU said in a statement.

The Starbucks protesters, most of them aged in their 20s and 30s, swiped left on the invitation to unionise, saying that instead of engaging in collective bargaining with Starbucks management, they could more effectively communicate their needs through innovative tactics like the truck protest.

In South Korea, labour unions have for decades been fixtures in shipyards and factories, but recent years have seen efforts towards unionisation at some of the country’s most innovative companies, including tech titans Kakao and Naver.



$pl1tT3XT%Starbucks in crossfire of Korea's culture war
A new culture war is brewing in South Korea. At the center is Starbucks, after vice president of Shinsegae Group Chung Yong-jin -- the largest shareholder of the coffeehouse chain’s operation in the country -- shared several anti-communist posts on social media.

In recent weeks, the outspoken billionaire made headlines for using the hashtag “annihilate communism.” While he has gained support for his political statements, mostly from conservatives, some are threatening to boycott Starbucks over the support he has received from the far-right.“I’m going nowhere near Starbucks in Korea,” read one viral tweet alongside a screenshot of hosts from the far-right YouTube channel Hover Lab smiling with Starbucks merchandise.

Users have posted pictures of themselves getting a refund on gift cards, while others encouraged people to go to local independent cafes instead.

E-mart, a supermarket chain under Shinsegae Group, also happens to be the largest stakeholder of Starbucks Coffee Korea with a 67.5 percent stake.

Shinsegae Group’s shares plunged by 6.8 percent to 233,000 won ($195) on Monday against the benchmark KOSPI’s 0.95 percent decline, signaling jitters among investors that Chung’s social media presence might be a risk. On Tuesday, the stock recovered some of the losses to close at 239,000 won.

“Chung is aware of the boycott and said he would no longer use the phrase “annihilate communism,” one official at Shinsegae Group told The Korea Herald.

“It wasn’t his intention, so he expressed concern that (his social media posts) were being politicized,” the official added.

Despite the vice president’s internal message on Monday, Chung shared another Instagram post with a screenshot of the news article about North Korea’s missile launch Tuesday morning with two cryptic circles, prompting others to type “myeol-gong” in the comment section instead. The word means “annihilate communism” in English. The post was later taken down.

Lee Young-ae, a professor at the department of consumer science at Incheon National University, said Chung’s comments are “calculated.”

“Based on the word ‘myeol-gong‘ (annihilate communism), it’s easy to assume what Chung supports politically. As a businessman, I doubt this was done on a whim. It seems like a calculated move.” She claimed Chung’s recent remarks failed to protect shareholders interests, and came from the mindset of an “owner” rather than a “professional businessman.”

“The remarks also come after the golden cross where polls show people want a different party to take power but approval ratings for the main opposition party is not living up to the sentiment,” Lee added.

Among Chung’s supporters, however, his playful anti-communist messages have gone down well.

“We went to Starbucks outside our office and bought all the tumblers,” said Kim Se-eui of Hover Lab during a recent livestream.

“Liberals love Americanos. Let’s see how many days they can survive without Starbucks.”

By Yim Hyun-su (hyunsu@heraldcorp.com)
