Flood risk in Malaysia – impact on economy
Sunbiz
05- 17- 2022 06:42 PM
PETALING JAYA: Last year’s great flood from Dec 16-21 caused economic losses of RM5.3 billion to RM6.5 billion, according to Malaysian Reinsurance Bhd’s (Malaysian Re) latest publication Malaysian Insurance Highlights (MIH 2021) that examines the impact of flooding on the Malaysian economy and insurance markets.

MIH 2021 explores the major challenge of underinsured flood risk in Malaysia whereby on average only about 10% of economic losses are covered. The publication revealed that Malaysia’s insurers shouldered about RM1.5-2 billion (US$360-480 million) or 20% to 30% of the economic losses as a high share of manufacturing properties were hit in the Federal Territory of Kuala Lumpur and Selangor.

Malaysian Re president and CEO Zainudin Ishak said the cost for flood insurance is rather nominal. The cover is available as an extension to the standard fire policy and costs about 0.086% of the sum-insured. In the personal lines, the pricing of the risk is perceived as high and is often only purchased in flood prone regions or following recent events.

“Mostly homeowners are insured as the banks arrange the cover as part of the mortgage. The lower-income segment of the population, who run a high flood exposure, rely on the government in case of a loss. In the recent flood it supported the people affected with a financial contribution of RM1.4 billion. Currently, we are working with Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM) and Malaysia’s National Disaster Management Agency (Nadma) to develop a solution that ties together those who can afford to insure with those who cannot,” said Zainudin in a statement in conjunction with the launch of the MIH 2021.

MIH 2021 accentuates the need to address the protection gap as flood risk increases, where the demand for flood cover is influenced by the government’s support of the country’s low-income segment for the loss caused by a disaster. This third edition of the MIH also states that the December flood has impacted the pricing for flood coverage in Malaysia’s insurance markets. Insurers are also expected to review their reinsurance structures to ensure they have sufficient coverages in place, due to the changing in understanding of flood risk in Malaysia.

“From an insurance point of view, there is a need to push for a deeper discussion to find a solution to better cover the country’s flood risk by bringing together the insurance sector, the regulator (BNM), Nadma and the government. While previously, the focus had been on developing a coverage which foremost addressed the exposure of the lower-income segments of Malaysia’s population, the current wholesome solutions aim to provide faster protection to consumers and encompass all parts of society or policyholders,” added Zainudin.

MIH 2021 was published in partnership with Faber Consulting AG, a Zurich-based research, communication, and business development consultancy. The findings of MIH 2021 are based on structured interviews with more than 24 executives representing 22 Malaysian insurers, reinsurers, intermediaries, and trade associations.

Zainudin said it has seen last year and in recent months how the livelihood and properties of people and communities across the nation were severely impacted by the flood catastrophe at unprecedented scale and unusual timings.

“The region grapples with the consequences of man-made climate change which has caused greater severity and frequency of floods. Hence, the topic of our publication this year came in timely, and we hope that it will provide an assessment of the current flood risk in Malaysia as well as its main trends and developments.”



$pl1tT3XT%StanChart expects Malaysia's economy to grow 7% in 2022
Bernama
May 17, 2022 16:47 pm +08
KUALA LUMPUR (May 17): The Malaysian economy is expected to return to above pre-Covid-19 pandemic levels with the 2022 gross domestic product (GDP) growth forecast up at 7% from 6.2% given stronger-than-expected growth in the first quarter (1Q22), said Standard Chartered Bank (StanChart).

The bank also maintained that overnight policy rate (OPR) hikes in 2022 will total 75 basis points, with two more hikes in July and September 2022 respectively, bringing the OPR up to 2.5% by end-2022. 

StanChart said the “growth recovery was broad-based”, which saw all components expanding quarter-on-quarter (q-o-q), with the exception of investment and trade in services remaining below pre-pandemic levels as of 1Q22.

"In terms of industries, 18 out of 21 sectors expanded q-o-q, and we estimate that 74% of the economy is above pre-Covid-19 levels," StanChart said in a research note on Tuesday (May 17).

The bank noted that the labour market had also continued to recover, with strong employment growth and tighter conditions translating into higher wage growth. 

It said the economic and labour market recovery “justifies” the move by Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM) to begin the process of normalising monetary policy from emergency settings. 

"We expect the process of normalising monetary policy from emergency settings to continue. While inflationary pressure is not substantial, the current low policy rate is not seen as commensurate with the economic recovery," it said. 

StanChart noted that BNM may also want “to take advantage of the robust growth to build policy space” as the policy guidance suggests that more rate hikes are likely. 

However, StanChart lowered its 2023 GDP growth forecast to 4.2% from 4.5% previously due to higher base effects.  



$pl1tT3XT%Malaysia not at risk of recession
PUTRAJAYA: Malaysia is not at risk of recession and is on track to meet forecast economic growth targets of between 5.3% and 6.3% this year, Finance Minister Tengku Datuk Seri Zafrul Abdul Aziz says.

Speaking at the ministry’s Hari Raya Aidilfitri open house yesterday, he said the country’s economic growth would be supported by the government’s expansionary fiscal policy as well as accommodative monetary policy.

He noted that the current talk of a global recession was premature and unwarranted, and Malaysia would see further growth momentum in the second quarter after recording a strong first-quarter gross domestic product growth of 5%.

“However, we remain wary of potential downside. There is a potential risk (due to) the war in Ukraine, high commodity prices and global monetary policy tightening.

“As a result, the government will need to ensure adequate fiscal flexibility in the future to manage such risks.

“This is why we intend to gradually reduce the fiscal deficit from 6.4% in 2021 to 6% in 2022 and also rationalise the subsidies to be more targeted,” he added.

Tengku Zafrul pointed out that failure to meet debt obligations was a major risk for countries in the event of a global recession but it was not a risk for Malaysia, as the risk was mitigated due to its low exposure to external debt, with less than 3% in foreign currencies.

He added that Malaysia had ample liquidity to finance the government’s and private sector’s borrowing needs. — Bernama



$pl1tT3XT%Economy still strong, Bank Negara assures amid weak ringgit worries
FMT Reporters -April 28, 2022 10:26 PM
PETALING JAYA: Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM) has dismissed concerns that the depreciation of the ringgit is a “tell-tale” sign that Malaysia will have trouble settling its external debts, as is the case with some countries.

“Let me stress that Malaysia is nowhere near that position,” BNM governor Nor Shamsiah Mohd Yunus told Bernama.

Nor Shamsiah said Malaysia was expected to record a current account surplus exceeding RM75 billion in 2022.

It was also exporting more than it was importing, which meant that there was more inflow than outflow of foreign currency, she added.

Nor Shamsiah stressed that Malaysia was also a net creditor to the world.
“Today, we have more foreign assets than foreign liabilities – unlike during the Asian Financial Crisis (in 1997).

“There should be no concern that Malaysia might not be able to meet its foreign currency obligations given the recent fluctuations in the ringgit,” the national news agency quoted her as saying.

Last Friday, it was reported that the ringgit dived to 4.32 against the greenback, the lowest since May 29, 2020, when it was trading at 4.3465 against the US dollar.

Nor Shamsiah attributed the weakening of the ringgit to external factors, namely the US dollar appreciating against most major and regional currencies; investor nervousness about the conflict in Ukraine and signs of weakness in the global growth momentum; and, increased concerns over the slowdown in China, particularly arising from the recent imposition of Covid-19 restrictions in major cities.

She went on to say that a weaker ringgit “can be both a negative and a positive, depending on where you are in the economy”.

And while the country could expect some price increases as imports become more expensive, it will not see hyperinflation.

A weaker ringgit, Nor Shamsiah said, would prompt consumers to switch to more domestically produced goods and services.

“This helps spur the local economy.”

She assured that BNM would continue to manage the risks arising from both domestic and external developments.

“While we do not target any level of exchange rate, our role is to ensure movements in the exchange rate are orderly. By that, we mean that there are no sharp or wide swings in the value of the ringgit.

“We are ready to use the tools at our disposal to ensure these outcomes. This will help businesses plan and undertake business and investment decisions with more certainty, which will help to support a more sustainable recovery.”

Malaysia, she said, was still expected to register a strong economic recovery this year.

“Borders are open, businesses are resuming activity and our job market is improving. Our flexible and market-determined exchange rate is supporting us on this recovery path.

“Beyond this, Malaysia has a healthy current account surplus, a net external creditor position, and also an adequate level of international reserves. Our economic and trade structure is also highly diversified, allowing us to count on many sources of growth.”



$pl1tT3XT%Malaysia’s Economy Rebounds In Q1 2022, OPR Hike A Negative Incentive For Property Sector, And More
• 17 May 2022
10th May – 17th May

Malaysia’s economy grew 5% in the first quarter of 2022, rebounding from the 0.5% contraction registered over the same period last year.

Meanwhile, the country is expected to see a reduction in property buying tendencies following Bank Negara Malaysia’s (BNM) decision to raise the Overnight Policy Rate (OPR).

1) Malaysia’s economy rebounds in Q1 2022

Malaysia’s gross domestic product (GDP) grew 5% in the first quarter of 2022, rebounding from the 0.5% contraction registered over the same period last year.

The positive economic performance came on the back of improving domestic demand as economic activities normalise as the government eased containment measures, reported Bernama.

“The improvement also reflects the recovery in the job market, with the unemployment rate declining further to 4.1% (Q4 2021: 4.3%), as well as continued policy support,” said Bank Negara Malaysia.

BNM Governor Tan Sri Nor Shamsiah Mohd Yunus expects the domestic economy to improve further this year, with growth forecasted to be between 5.3% and 6.3% in 2022.

2) OPR hike a negative incentive for property sector
Malaysia is expected to see a reduction in property buying tendencies following Bank Negara Malaysia’s (BNM) decision to raise the Overnight Policy Rate (OPR).

“The property sector specifically, we can say — very synthetically — that the rise in the interest rate is a negative incentive because, to put it simply, it increases the cost of borrowing,” Centre for Market Education Chief Executive Officer Dr Carmelo Ferlito told The Malaysian Reserve.

He noted that the extent to which the buying behaviour will be affected depends on the mood of the buyers as well as their general sentiment on the national economy.

The central bank’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) raised the OPR by 25 basis points to 2% from a record low of 1.75% since July 2020, amid inflationary pressures arising from improved labour market and the reopening of the global economy.

3) Property developers to face margin compression amid rising building material costs

MIDF Research has maintained its Neutral call on Malaysia’s property sector as it expects property developers to face moderate margin compression in the near term due to rising cost of building materials.

The research house attributed the rising building materials cost to the increasing cost of petroleum products, reported the New Straits Times.
“While we reckon that property developers may partially pass on the higher building materials cost to property buyers by raising property selling prices marginally, we think that property developers are likely to face slight margin compression in the near term as they may not be able to fully pass on the cost increase to property buyers considering the present subdued property market,” said MIDF Research in a note.
4) Building materials cost index up in April

The Department of Statistics Malaysia (DoSM) revealed that the Building Material Cost Index (BCI) with and without steel bars has increased for all building categories by 0.1% to 3.6% in April, with Peninsular Malaysia posting increases of 0.6% to 3.4%, Sabah between 0.1% and 2.4% and Sarawak between 0.8% and 3.6%.

Datuk Seri Dr Mohd Uzir Mahidin, Chief Statistician of DoSM, shared that almost all building materials such as sand, cement, steel, aggregates, roofing materials, bricks and wall as well as ceiling materials registered increases in April, reported Bernama.

Without steel bars, the BCI for all regions within Peninsular Malaysia rose between 0.9% and 3.4% for almost all building categories.

“The BCI without steel bars in Sabah and Sarawak increased between 0.3% and 3.6% for almost all categories of building,” he said.
5) Over 5,000 affordable homes to be built in Johor this year
Johor Menteri Besar Datuk Onn Hafiz Ghazi has revealed plans to build over 5,000 affordable housing units in Johor for the low-income (B40) group starting this year.

In his official Facebook page, he shared that the houses will be affordable priced – from RM40,000 to RM150,000 each, reported Bernama.

“The state government is committed to ensuring that at least 5,033 affordable housing units would be completed by this year and the following year,” he said.

Meanwhile, the state government’s affordable housing plan for the middle-income (M40) group is also undergoing some fine tuning, he said.

6) Sabah expects more MM2H applications from China nationals

Sabah expects to receive more applications for the Malaysia My Second Home (MM2H) programme from China nationals once the state officially unveiled the program’s new rules.

Notably, the Sabah Cabinet has passed new regulations for the MM2H programme after Prime Minister Datuk Seri Ismail Sabri Yaakob has agreed that Sarawak and Sabah can formulate policies that are better suited to local sentiments and strategies, reported The Borneo Post.

“Once the Sabah Government makes the official announcement of the new MM2H regulations, we can expect to attract more Chinese applicants to the state, which in turn, will stimulate the local economy and benefit other industries including healthcare, insurance and real estate,” said Dato’ Sri Tiong King Sing, Prime Minister’s Special Envoy to China.

7) Value of construction work completed declines 6.1% in Q1 2022

The Department of Statistics Malaysia (DOSM) revealed that the value of construction work done during the first quarter of 2022 contracted 6.1% to RM29.5 billion from the previous year.

In Q1 2022, Selangor registered the highest value of completed construction work with RM6.9 billion, said Datuk Seri Dr Mohd Uzir Mahidin, Chief Statistician at DOSM. It is followed by the Federal Territories and Sarawak with RM5.8 billion and RM3.3 billion, respectively, reported Bernama.

The civil engineering subsector continued to be biggest contributor to the value of completed construction work at 35.1%, followed by the non-residential buildings subsector at 30.4%. The residential buildings and special trades activities subsectors, on the other hand, contributed 24.2% and 10.2%, respectively.



